# Description
  Relative effectiveness accounts for the role of geography on nitrogen and phosphorus load changes and, in turn, Bay water quality. Because of various factors such as in-stream transport and nitrogen and phosphorus cycling in the watershed, a given management measure on water quality in the Bay, varies depending on the location of its implementation within the watershed (USEPA 2003b). For example, the same control applied in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, will have less of an effect on Bay DO than one applied in Baltimore, Maryland. 
  
  A relative effectiveness assessment evaluates the effects of both estuarine transport (location of discharge/runoff loading to the Bay) and riverine transport (location of the discharge/runoff loading in the watershed). EPA determined the relative effectiveness of each contributing river basin in the overall Bay watershed on DO in several mainstem Bay segments and the lower Potomac River by using the Bay Water Quality Model to run a series of isolation runs and using the Bay Watershed Model to estimate attenuation of load through the watershed. 
   
  From the relative estuarine effectiveness analysis, several things are apparent. Northern, major river basins have a greater relative influence than southern major river basins on the central Bay and the lower Potomac River DO levels because of the general circulation patterns of the Chesapeake Bay (up the Eastern Shore, down the Western Shore). Nitrogen and phosphorus from the most southern river basins of the James and York rivers have relatively less influence on mainstem Bay water quality because of their proximity to the mouth of the Bay. Because these southern river basins are on the western shore, the counterclockwise circulation of the lower Bay also tends to transport nitrogen and phosphorus loads from those larger southern river basins out of the Bay mouth. That same counterclockwise circulation tends to sweep loads from the lower Eastern Shore northward. 
   
  River basins whose loads discharge directly to the mainstem Bay, like the Susquehanna, tend to have more effect on the mainstem Bay segments than basins with long riverine estuaries (e.g., the Patuxent, Potomac, and Rappahannock rivers). The long riverine estuaries, with longer water residence times, allow nitrogen and phosphorus attenuation (burial and denitrification) before the waters reaching the mainstem Chesapeake Bay. The size of a river basin is uncorrelated to its relative influence, although larger river basins, with larger loads, have a greater absolute effect. The upper tier of relative effect on the three mainstem segments includes the largest river basin (Susquehanna) and the smallest (Eastern Shore Virginia). Their high degree of impact is because they both discharge directly into the Bay, without intervening river estuaries to attenuate loads, and they are both up-current relative to the general Bay circulation pattern. 
   
 The estuarine effectiveness is estimated by running a series of Bay Water Quality Model scenarios holding one major river basin at E3 loads and all other major river basins at calibration levels. After considering several metrics to assess the DO benefit from progressive reductions in nitrogen and phosphorus loadings, EPA chose a 25th percentile. The advantage of this metric was that it was based on DO values at the more critical lower end of the range (25th percentile) yet, unlike a percent nonattainment metric, it could also be used for segments that were in attainment under some loading scenarios. For each scenario, the increase in the 25th percentile DO concentration during the summer criteria assessment period in the critical segments CB3MH, CB4MH, and CB5MH for deep-channel and CB3MH, CB4MH, CB5MH, and POTMH for deep- water was recorded. The 25th percentile was selected as the appropriate metric as indicative of a change in low DO. The riverine effectiveness is calculated as the fraction of load produced in the watershed that is delivered to the estuary. It is estimated as an output of the watershed model. For more details on this method, see Appendix K. 
   
 Absolute estuarine effectiveness accounts for the role of both total loads and geography on pollutant load changes to the Bay. The absolute estuarine effectiveness of a contributing river basin, measured separately both above and below the fall line, is the change in 25th percentile DO concentration that results from a single basin changing from calibration conditions to E3. For example, if the 25th percentile DO in the deep water of the lower Potomac River segment POTMH moves from 5 to 5.3 mg/L from a change in loads from calibration to E3 in the Potomac above fall line basin, the absolute estuarine effectiveness is 0.3 mg/L. Comparing the absolute estuarine effectiveness among basins helps to identify which major river basins have the greatest effect on WQS. 
   
Relative estuarine effectiveness is defined as absolute estuarine effectiveness divided by the total load reduction, delivered to tidal waters, necessary to gain that water quality response. For example, if the load reduction in the Potomac above fall line basin was 30 million pounds of pollutant to get a 0.3 mg/L change in DO concentration, the relative estuarine effectiveness is 0.01 mg/L per million pounds. The higher the relative estuarine effectiveness, the less reduction required to achieve the change in status. The relative estuarine effectiveness calculation is an attempt to isolate the effect of geography by normalizing the load on a per-pound basis. Comparing the relative estuarine effectiveness among the major river basins shows the resulting gain in attainment from performing equal pound reductions among the major river basins. 
Riverine attenuation also has an effect on overall effectiveness. Loads are naturally attenuated or reduced as they travel through long free-flowing river systems, making edge-of-stream loads in headwater regions less effective on a pound-for-pound basis than edge-of-stream loads that take place nearer tidal waters in the same river basin. The watershed model calculates delivery factors as the fraction of edge-of-stream loads that are delivered to tidal waters. 
The units of riverine attenuation are delivered pound per edge-of-stream pound. Multiplying the estuarine relative effectiveness (measured as DO increase per delivered pound reduction) by the riverine delivery factor (measured as delivered pound per edge-of-stream pound) gives the overall relative effectiveness in DO concentration increase per edge-of-stream pound. The relative estuarine effectiveness is the same for nitrogen or phosphorus, while the riverine delivery is different, so the overall relative effectiveness is calculated separately for nitrogen and phosphorus. Table 6-3 gives the overall relative effectiveness for nitrogen and phosphorus for the watershed jurisdictions by major river basin for above and below the fall line. 
   
The relative effectiveness numbers are separate for WWTPs and all other sources. The distinction is made because of the following: 
1. There is a wide disparity in the percent loading from WWTPs when comparing one basin to another. 
2. On the basis of information in Appendix K, it is EPA’s professional judgment that WWTPs can achieve a much higher percent of controllable load than that for other sources.

# Author/Orginator
<a href="http://chesapeakebay.net">The Chespeake Bay Program</a>

# Contact Information
Guido Yactayo
UMCES / Chesapeake Bay Program Office 410 Severn Ave Suite 112
Annapolic, MD
21403 USA
gyactayo@chesapeakebay.net


